# Word Order & Simple Sentences

**Kaltxì**! Hello! And welcome to The first installment of the Intro to Na'vi Grammar section of the Simplified Grammar Lessons Series.

This lesson will cover some very basic foundations of the grammar every beginner may want to start with in order to start making sentences.

**Makto ko!**

## Topics

### [Word Order](#1)

### [Most Basic Sentences](#2)

### [L and T Endings](#3)

### [Vocabulary Learned](#v)

<span id="1">
</span>

## Word Order

The word order of English is very specific. In the simplest of sentences, it is always the same: The subject comes first, then the verb. If there is an object, then it comes after the verb (SVO). For example:

> She runs. (_subject verb._)

> He cooks food. (_Subject verb object_.)

Word order in the Na'vi language, however, is very flexible unlike the rigid word order in English. For example:

- **Poe tul.**
- _She runs._

would mean the same thing as:

- **Tul poe.**
- _She runs._

<span id="2">
</span>

## Most Basic Sentences

The simplest and easiest sentences in the Na'vi language are the 2 word sentences, just like that one in the example above. All you need to do is follow these simple steps:

1. Use a noun as found in the dictionary
2. Use a verb as found in the dictionary

These two words can be in either order, like the following example:

- **Payoang slele.**
- _The fish swims._

or

- **Slele payoang**
- _The fish swims._

<span id="3">
</span>

## L and T Endings

In all the previous sentences, there was only one noun and one verb, and no modifications. But what happens when there are two (or more) nouns involved in the action of the verb?

In English, the word order of a sentence establishes the roles of the people or things involved. For example, compare these two sentences:

> Peyral hunts an animal. (_subject is Peyral, object is animal_)

> An animal hunts Peyral. (_subject is animal, object is Peyral_)

As you see, the roles are switched by changing which one comes before the verb and which one comes after the verb.

In Na'vi, however, since the word order in a sentence like this is entirely flexible, word order itself tells us nothing about the roles. Instead, the Na'vi use what are called Cases, which are small changes to the _words_ to keep track of the roles. The above sentences would translate to the following:

- **Peyralìl taron ioangit.**
- Peyral-ìl taron ioang-it.
- _Peyral hunts an animal._

As you see here above, the **-ìl** case ending marks **Peyral** as the _subject_ and the **-it** case ending marks **ioang** as the _object_.

- **Peyralit taron ioangìl.**
- Peyral-it taron ioang-ìl.
- _An animal hunts Peyral._

Notice how the word order stayed the same yet the roles were reversed simply by swapping the **-ìl** and **-it** case endings.

A famous example of this kind of sentence structure to remember is:

- **Oel ngati kame.**
- Oe-l nga-ti kame
- _I See you._

This word order of "Subject object verb" (SOV) is quite commonly used. Also, here, we see other forms of **-ìl** and **-it** cases which are **-l** and **-ti**. (**-it** / **-ti** also has one last form, which is **-t**) These alternative forms exists for the sake of making nouns easier to pronounce when adding these cases.

In order to make any sentence of this type, just follow these steps:

1. Look up the verb you want to use. **make sure it is marked as _vtr._ or _vtrm._** (If it's not, then you can't use -l and -t cases on the nouns)
2. Look up the noun you want to use as the subject doing the action and add **-l** (only if the noun ends with vowel) or **-ìl** onto the end of it.
3. Look up the noun you want to use as the object receiving the action and add **-t** (only if the noun ends with a vowel) or **-it** (if it ends with consonant) or **-ti** onto the end of it.

These three words can be in any order. Just note that whatever word comes last in the sentence is the one that carries the most emphasis of the sentence.

<span id="v">
</span>

## Vocabulary Learned

Na'vi       | English
----------- | --------------------------------
**poe**     | pn. _she_
**tul**     | vin. _run_
**payoang** | n. _fish_
**slele**   | vin. _swim_
**Peyral**  | prop. n. (_A female Na'vi name_)
**taron**   | vtr. _hunt_
**ioang**   | n. _animal_
**oe**      | pn. _I_
**nga**     | pn. _you_
**kame**    | vtr. _See (deep spiritual sense)

Some text. [here is a link.](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet)
